

<Characteristics of Network Traffic Flow Anomalies> -- Paul Barford and David Plonka
2 key point: policies && thresholds (defined by user)

used open sourced tools/libs: 
  FlowScan
  Bro

cluster these anomalies into three groups based on similarities in observed flow behavior
  1, network operation anomalies: net-work device outages, significant differences in network be-havior caused by configuration changes (e.g. adding new equipment or imposing rate limits) and plateau behavior caused by traffic reaching environmental limits.
  2, flash crowd anomalies: software release (e.g. UW is a RedHat Linux mirror site) or external interest in a Web site due to some kind of national publicity. Flash crowd behavior is distinguished by a rapid rise in traffic flows of a particular type (eg. FTP flows) or to a well known destination with a gradual drop off over time.
  3, network abuse anomalies: Two types of network abuse that can be identified using flows are DoS flood attacks and port scans

steps:
simple statistics --- time series analysis --- wavelet analysis
The first step in our analysis process will be to iso-
late each of the anomalies in our data sets and to group
them into our three general categories. Simple statisti-
cal analysis techniques will then be applied to each of
the anomalies. These include finding moments, plotting
distributions and looking for distributional models to de-
scribe the anomalies. This level of analysis may or may
not lead identification of significant similarities or differ-
ences within and/or between categories.
Our next step will be to apply time series analysis tech-
niques to the anomaly data. This will include analyzing
stationarity, correlation structures and testing various time
series models to see if any are accurate statistical repre-
sentations of our anomaly data. We expect these analyses
to give insight to the nature of anomalies and possibly to
provide predictive capability if good models can be de-
veloped, however the distinctive shapes of each type of
anomaly warrant further investigation.
The final step in our characterization process will be
to apply wavelet analysis to the anomaly data. Wavelets
are functions which divide data into frequency components
enabling analysis of each component according to its scale.
Wavelets have advantages over standard Fourier analysis
for data sets which have sharp spikes such as is seen in our
anomaly data. We expect wavelet analysis to shed signif-
icant light on the structures of each anomaly and to pro-vide us with additional models for identifying and group-
ing anomalies.

paper for denial-of-service (DoS) attacks and port scan attacks:
  1, clustering methods: J. Toelle and O. Niggemann, “Supporting intrusion detection by graph clustering and graph drawing,” 
  2, neural networks: Fox, R. Henning, J. Reed, and R. Simonian, “A neural network approach towards intrusion detection,”
  3, Markov models: N. Ye, “A markov chain model of temporal behavior for anomaly detection,”
  4, flow-based methods: D. Moore, G. Voelker, and S. Savage, “Inferring internet denial-of-service activity,” V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in
real-time,” 

paper for flash crowd behavior:
  1, cooperative pushback: R. Manajan, S. Bellovin, S. Floyd, V. Paxson, S. Shenker, and J. Ioannidis, “Controlling high bandwidth aggregates in the net-work,”

  
